Mark 10, 45.
The Son of Man came not to be served.
Stop.
You don't need the rest of the verse to get the point.
He came not to be served.
Therefore, don't compromise the meaning of the incarnation by serving Christ.
Don't serve Him.
It's easy to assume that the more I do for Jesus, the more faithful I am.
But Piper flips that.
I'm Dan Kruver.
In this episode of Light and Truth, John Piper unpacks why Jesus came not to be served.
And what that means for how we relate to him on a daily basis.
This message was originally delivered in Wheaton, Illinois at the Act III Reformation Conference on October 29th, 1999.
I'm going to begin with reflections upon the title and this term, the Excellency of God.
I was reflecting on this word Excellency.
This is by way of introduction to my particular topic about God being too excellent to need servants.
So I want you to reflect with me for a moment on the term, the Excellency of God.
And I want to do it by asking this particular question.
Why do we in conferences like this or in certain churches or sermons put forward themes like this instead of just dealing with the simple gospel?
Christ died for my sins according to the Scriptures.
He was buried.
He rose again triumphant over death and hell and Satan.
Why don't you just deal with the simple, glorious facts of the gospel instead of these big, broad, overarching things like the excellency of God?
What's the reason for that?
Now there is a reason.
It's very relevant to understanding the gospel and I would invite you to open your Bible by way of introduction to
2 Corinthians chapter 4, I confess that I cannot distinguish in my mind very clearly between the term the excellency of God and the glory of God.
And so I am taking them biblically as almost interchangeable.
Read with me 2 Corinthians 4 verses 3 to 6.
Even if our gospel is veiled, gospel, we're talking gospel here now, even if our gospel is veiled, it is veiled to those who are perishing, in whose case the God of this world has blinded the minds of the unbelieving so that they might not see, now these next words are some of the most important words in my estimation in all the Bible, in understanding the nature of conversion and the nature of the gospel.
And they recur again in verse six, but let's read them carefully and attend to every phrase that they might not see the gospel.
Now define it for us, Paul, tell us what you mean of the glory of Christ.
That's the gospel.
The gospel is the gospel, the excellency of Christ.
is the gospel, or at least is an essential component of the gospel.
You see that?
I'm not adding any words here, except replacing the word glory with Excellency.
So that they might not see, this is the devil's aim, that they might not see the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ.
The gospel is not preached where the glory of Christ is not exalted.
And then it defines Christ, who is the image of God.
So the glory of Christ is the glory of God, which is now spoken again in verse six, but read five as well.
For we do not preach ourselves, but Christ Jesus as Lord, a glorious Lord, an excellent Lord, and ourselves as your bond servants for Jesus' sake.
For God who said light shall shine out of darkness is the one who has
shown in our hearts to give, and now he repeats these words in slightly different arrangement.
He's shown in our hearts to give what?
The light that corresponds with light in verse 4.
If you can read vertically here, you should let your eyes run up and down to link these words.
Light in verse 4 with light in verse 6.
You got that?
of the knowledge, replacing of the gospel, of the glory of God instead of the glory of Christ, in the face of Christ instead of who is the image of God.
That parallel is so rich, it would keep you for days, I believe, reflecting.
But here's what I want you to see by way of introduction.
As to why I love the theme of this conference, why the mission of our church is called, we exist to spread a passion for the supremacy of God in all things for the joy of all peoples.
We've chosen the word supremacy, could have chosen glory, could have chosen excellency.
The reason for words like this is because
in order to be faithful to a text like this and to really penetrate to the essence and bottom of the gospel that must shine in the heart of person for them to be saved, there's got to be glory.
Now let me just draw out a couple of implications of this to lead into my theme.
The gospel is the gospel of the glory of Christ.
That's not an implication, that's a quotation.
The glory of Christ shines out of the gospel.
It stands forth from the gospel.
When you see the gospel for what it really is, you see glory.
You see the glory of Christ.
You see excellency.
Here's an implication.
To be saved
One must experience 2 Corinthians 4-4 and 4-6.
To be saved, one must experience 2 Corinthians 4-6 and 4-4.
That's huge!
Because it means that the gospel has to be preached in such a way as to
lift up the gloriousness of it and the Holy Spirit has to work to illumine the heart by the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ.
Shine in your heart because there's no life if it doesn't shine there and you're not saved.
Now the reason I say the excellency of God is an important theme is because I love the gospel.
You say, why don't you just preach the simple gospel?
This is the essence of the gospel, the excellency of Jesus radiating out through his work of a perfectly lived life and atoning death.
A triumphant resurrection is the revelation of the glory of Christ, who is God.
And if you don't see it,
as glorious you are not born again.
That's serious and that's the gospel.
And there are a lot of non-born again professing Christians in the churches who have no taste for the glory of God.
And that's scary.
No taste, no sight, taste and see, taste and see.
We're talking a spiritual seeing.
Jesus said, seeing, they do not see and hearing, they do not hear.
There are two seeing, folks, and there are two hearings.
One is with this eyes and it saves nobody.
One is with the eyes of the heart, as Paul called it, in Ephesians 1, 18, and it saves the soul.
And you only can see with the eyes of the heart when verse 6 of 2 Corinthians 4 happens by grace.
and you should plead with God to give it to you tonight if you don't have it.
The glory of Christ in the gospel, in the cross, in the resurrection, in the perfect life of righteousness, in the ascension, in his reign and intercession for us in heaven, this story is glory.
and you must taste it as glory.
And that's the evidence you've been wrought upon by the living God to make you his own.
No taste for glory, no salvation.
And you don't make that happen.
God makes that happen.
The reason the gospel is so cheap today and there are so many nominal believers in our churches is because people ask the question I began with.
Why don't you just preach the simple gospel?
and lay aside these big, high, heavy, weighty theological themes like the excellency of God.
Faith, the last implication before I move to the theme, faith is a seeing and savoring of the glory of God in the Gospel.
That's the meaning
of saving faith.
A seeing and savoring of the glory of Christ who is the image of God.
My whole enterprise of Christian hedonism is an effort to make plain the spiritual seeing and savoring.
And all I mean by savoring is seeing it
as precious.
I reckon everything is lost for the surpassing value of knowing Christ Jesus, my Lord.
Indeed, I count all things as rubbish that I might gain Christ.
That's saving faith talking.
That's not any add on to faith talking.
Faith is a savoring, a treasuring
a leaning on and loving and delighting in what you've seen in the gospel.
That's why there's no difficulty moving from the glorious once for all work of justification in the moment of the first twinkling of an eye of saving faith to this process of sanctification because the faith that justifies is that kind of faith and it sanctifies.
You can't not be holy when you love God like that.
We have so gotten saving faith wrong by making it some kind of choice to believe a doctrine that people scratch their heads as to why they're not being changed.
They're not born again.
They've never seen glory as glory.
Glory is precious.
Glory is a treasure.
Glory is that for which you count everything is lost.
I've never seen it.
Therefore, we're not on our faces as a church crying out.
Oh, God, come with light.
Do verse 6 of 2 Corinthians 4 in our churches because our people don't see it.
You wonder why the early church died so easily?
That is, the saints died so easily?
How could they sing on the way to the stake or the lion?
How could they do that?
because to die is gain.
My question now, how do you serve God so that His excellency is magnified and not compromised in your life?
We have, this room is filled with servants of the Lord and I want to tell you to be a servant tonight.
I'm basing it on X 17, 25.
God is not served by human hands.
as though he needed anything for he himself gives to all men life and breath and everything.
Therefore, beware of serving God.
Beware of serving God.
You can dishonor God by serving God.
That's what that text says.
Let me give you another one just to add on to it.
Mark 10, 45, the son of man came, not
to be served.
Stop.
You don't need the rest of the verse to get the point.
He came not to be served.
Therefore, don't compromise the meaning of the incarnation by serving Christ.
Don't serve Him.
So that needs to be heard.
It needs to be wrestled with.
Now this is a big issue to me.
I wrote a whole book to try to explain what I mean called future grace.
And what burdened me behind that book was an ethic out there of how to serve God that has a modicum of truth behind it that makes it almost the given way of articulating service to God today, which I think is not
the most God-glorifying way.
Namely, I've got different names for it.
I sort of like the term the tanto ethic.
But I realize I'm 53 and probably most young people in the room don't know the Lone Ranger and tanto and high-o silver and a white stallion and a black mask and a silver bullet.
And that's just 50, sorry.
But I like it because the Lone Ranger got into this relationship with Tonto, this Indian who helped him out of so many scrapes by saving his life.
And it was the ethic of the Indian tribe that he saved the life.
But once a man saves your life, then you bind yourself to him and you follow him and you serve him the rest of your life, saving his life.
And so the whole story, year after year in the 50s, was Tonto rescuing poor Lone Ranger from all of his
scrapes as he was trying to do good around the world.
So you see where I'm hidden.
God has saved you, and now your motivation is to serve him for the rest of your life and help him.
Now nobody articulates their service of God that way, but I fear that it may come close.
He gave, he gave his life for me.
What have I given for him?
Call it the debtor's ethic, that's probably the better term.
God has done so much for me, and now out of gratitude, I will do and do and do for Him.
So you look back to what He did for you, and as you turn to the future, what you see is a God whom you are to serve.
There's something profoundly wrong with that, at least in its tendency, and the way it's lived out by many.
Thank you for listening to this episode of Light and Truth, where we are committed to providing God-centered preaching to help you see Christ clearly and treasure Him truly.
I'm your host, Dan Kruver.
On our next episode, John Piper continues our eight-part series, Living and Dying for the Glory of Christ with a message titled, Down, Down, Down into Grace.
I hope you'll join us.
For more resources, visit Desiring God
dot org.